Docs: update query planning best practices guide (#8084)
apollographql/router: docs/source/routing/query-planning/query-planning-best-practices.mdx

### Understanding query plan determinism

Like Google Maps calculating the most efficient route from point A to point B, the Apollo Router determines the optimal path to resolve your GraphQL operation. The "route" remains consistent as long as the underlying conditions don't change. However, just as adding new roads, construction detours, changing speed limits, or current traffic patterns can alter your GPS route, changes to your federated graph can impact query planning decisions.

The Apollo Router considers several inputs when generating query plans:

- The GraphQL operation - The specific query, mutation, or subscription being executed
- Supergraph schema - The composed schema from all your subgraphs
- Query planner version - Tied to your specific router version
- Router configuration - Including URL overrides, coprocessor logic, and other runtime config settings

> - Directive usage - How @shareable, @requires, progressive @override, @provides, and other directives are implemented across subgraphs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Directive usage - How `@shareable`, `@requires`, progressive `@override`, `@provides`, and other directives are implemented across subgraphs.
```
Going to commit this small change so that AI Librarian runs and helps us out with the first pass review!

Changes to any of these inputs can result in different query plans, even for identical operations.

### Generating accurate query plans for troubleshooting

To troubleshoot query plan issues effectively, you need to generate plans using conditions that match your target environment as closely as possible. The most accurate approach is testing against the exact same router configuration and setup you're investigating.

Recommended approaches in order of accuracy:

> - Existing environment - Simply use the router (in whichever environment you're investigating) to generate plans with one of the `Apollo-Expose-Query-Plan` headers.

Author: ```suggestion
- Existing environment - Use the router (in whichever environment you're investigating) to generate plans with one of the <code>Apollo-Expose-Query-Plan</code> headers.
```

- Environment mirror - Use a configuration that mirrors the environment you're investigating as closely as possible.
- CI/CD pipeline integration - Generate plans as part of your deployment pipeline.
- Local development workflow - Run operations locally with production-like configuration.

The higher on this list, the more accurate your query plans will likley be compared to the behavior in your target environment.

### Using the router's query plan exposure features

The Apollo Router provides built-in capabilities to expose query plans for debugging without relying on external tools or scripts. This ensures you're seeing exactly how the router would execute operations in your specific environment.

#### Enabling query plan exposure

To expose query plans, enable the experimental plugin in your router configuration:

```yaml
plugins:
  experimental.expose_query_plan:
    enabled: true
```

<Note>

> If the router is started in `--dev` mode or being used via `rover dev`, this plugin is automatically enabled.

Author: ```suggestion
If you start the router in <code>--dev</code> mode or use <code>rover dev</code>, this plugin is automatically enabled.
```

</Note>

#### Using the Apollo-Expose-Query-Plan header

Once enabled, you can control query plan exposure using the `Apollo-Expose-Query-Plan` header with your requests:

##### Option 1: Include plans with response data

`Apollo-Expose-Query-Plan: true`

> This returns the query plan in the response under the extensions.queryPlan key alongside your actual data.

Author: ```suggestion
This returns the query plan in the response under the <code>extensions.queryPlan</code> key alongside your actual data.
```

The router handles @skip and @include directives through a two-phase process:

**Query Planning Phase**: When the router receives an operation containing conditional directives, it analyzes whether entire subgraph calls can be avoided. If a conditional directive can eliminate the need to query a subgraph entirely, the router creates conditional query plan fetch nodes. This optimization prevents unnecessary network calls and reduces overall query execution time. See [Conditional Nodes](/graphos/schema-design/federated-schemas/reference/query-plans#condition-nodes) for more info about how the router calculates this.

**Response Formatting and Validation Phase**: For conditional directives that cannot be optimized at the query planning level, the router delegates their execution to the appropriate subgraphs by including the directives in the subgraph requests. However, the router maintains responsibility for ensuring GraphQL specification compliance by validating and reformatting responses from subgraphs.

> During response processing, the router's [`Query::format_response`](https://github.com/apollographql/router/blob/115d7a1a170c415a5a3dfa03fa9261406c7e7868/apollo-router/src/spec/query.rs#L124) logic validates that subgraphs properly handled the conditional directives. If a subgraph fails to correctly apply @skip or @include logic, the router automatically prunes unrequested fields and reorders the response to match the expected shape. This dual-layer approach ensures reliable execution even when subgraphs have inconsistent directive handling.

Author: ```suggestion
During response processing, the router's [<code>Query::format_response</code>](https://github.com/apollographql/router/blob/115d7a1a170c415a5a3dfa03fa9261406c7e7868/apollo-router/src/spec/query.rs#L124) logic validates that subgraphs properly handled the conditional directives. If a subgraph fails to correctly apply <code>@Skip</code> or <code>@include</code> logic, the router automatically prunes unrequested fields and reorders the response to match the expected shape. This dual-layer approach ensures reliable execution even when subgraphs have inconsistent directive handling.
```
